# 1.2: Describe characteristics of network topology architectures

* Topics are split up as per the exam topics list.
    1. Two-tier LAN design:
        * The access layer is at the bottom tier, which is where end hosts connect to (security services such as DAI and QoS marking are perforned here).
        * The distribution layer is at the upper tier, where access-layer connections are aggregated and connected to the WAN or Internet; it is the border between layer 2 and layer 3.
        * Also known as the "collapsed core" design due to the lack of a core layer, present in the three-tiered LAN design.
        * Links between distribution switches are on layer 3.
        * Partial mesh between distribution switches and access-layer switches.
    2. Three-tier LAN design:
        * The core layer is added in the three-tier design to connect distribution layers together in larger networks, with a focus on fast transport.
        * CPU-intensive operations aren't performed at the core layer (this is supposed to be taken care of at the lower layers).
        * All layer 3 connections at this layer.
        * Resillience is a major goal of three-tier design; the LAN should still have connectivity even with some device failures.
    3. Spine-Leaf architecture:
        * Designed for data centers, dedicated locations for servers, network devices, and other systems.
        * Accommodates larger flows "east-west" traffic, or traffic between servers on the same part of the network.
        * Spine-Leaf architecture is a two-tier design with some specific rules:
            * Every leaf switch is connected to every spine switch
            * Every spine switch is connected to every leaf switch
            * Both spine and leaf switches do not connect to their own kind.
            * End hosts only connect to leaf switches.
            * The path taken by traffic is randomly chosen for load balancing purposes.
            * Each server is separated by the same hop count (except those connected to the same leaf).
    4. WAN Architectures:
        * Wide Area Network
        * Can refer to the internet, but often refers to a company's private connections linking geographically distant areas together.
        * VPNs can be used to create private WAN links over public or shared networks.
        * Leased Lines:
            * Dedicated physical (serial)connections between two sites, often brokered by ISPs.
            * Hub and spoke topologies are common with leased line setups (a central service provider data center linked to each company office).
        * Internet VPNs:
            * Can use protocols such as IPsec to form virtual tunnels between sites, allowing for direct and confidential connectivity between them.
            * IPSec:
                * A site-to-site VPN, a permanent connection between two sites over the Internet.
                * Tunnel is created through encrypting the original packet and encapsulating it within a VPN header and new IP header.
                * The sending party sends traffic to their tunnel endpoint, where it is encrypted and sent through the tunnel where it is then decrypted by the other network's tunnel endpoint and sent to the receiving party.
                * Does not support multicast or broadcast traffic without the use of GRE.
                    * GRE (Generic Routing Encapsulation) can encapsulate a variety of Layer 3 protocols as well as the aforementioned traffic types.
                    * For GRE over IPsec, the original packet is encapsulated inside of a GRE header and new IP header, is encrypted, and has a VPN header and new IP header added too.
                * A full mesh of tunnels between sites is not an easy or cheap task for an enterprise.
                    * DMVPN (Dynamic Multipoint VPN) is a Cisco solution that allows IPsec tunnels to be made to a central hub site, with each site automatically being connected to every other site in a full-mesh topology.
            * Remote Access VPNs:
                * Employed to allow end devices such as phones and laptops to access an enterprise intranet securely over the internet (i.e: Cisco AnyConnect)
                * TLS is used to form a secure tunnel to the company network, often in the case of employees who are working from home.
        * MPLS:
            * Multi Protocol Label Switching
            * Allows VPNs to be created over service provider MPLS infrastructure through labels.
            * Terms:
                * CE router - Customer Edge router
                * PE router - Provider Edge router
                * P router - Provider core router
            * Labels are added when packets arrive from the CE routers and are used for forwarding in the SP network.
            * Layer 3 MPLS VPN:
                * CE and PE routers peer with a routing protocol (or use static routes) to share routing info.
                * Both CE routers learn about each other's routes through the SP MPLS network.
            * Layer 2 MPLS VPN:
                * The SP network is transparent to the CE routers.
                * CE routers peer directly to each other if a routing protocol is enabled.
            * Different forms of connection exist for MPLS WAN access, such as:
                * 4G/5G
                * CATV
                * Serial leased line
                * Ethernet Fiber
        * DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) provides an internet connection through the phone line, and requires a modem for the data to be sent over it.
        * CATV (Cable TV) provides internet connectivity through the same lines used to deliver cable TV to the consumer, also requiring a modem.
        * Redundancy in Internet Connections:
            * Single Homed - 1 connections to 1 ISP
            * Dual Homed - 2 connections to 1 ISP
            * Multihomed - 1 connection to each of 2 ISPs
            * Dual Multihomed - 2 connections to each of 2 ISPs
    5. SOHO (Small Office/Home Office) Networks:
        * Refers to the office of a small business or consumer home network.
        * All networking functions are often served by one device, such as a home router.
        * The device can serve as a:
            * Switch
            * Router
            * Firewall
            * WAP (Wireless Access Point)
            * Modem
    6. On Premises / Cloud
        * On Premises:
            * All infrastructure, such as servers and network devices, is on company premises.
            * Factors such as physical security or HVAC are the responsibility of the enterprise as well.
        * Cloud:
            * Five essential characteristics:
                * On-demand self-service
                * Broad network access
                * Resource pooling
                * Rapid elasticity
                * Measured service
            * Three service models:
                * Software as a Service (SaaS)
                * Platform as a Service (PaaS)
                * Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
            * Four deployment models:
                * Private - a cloud provisioned for use by one organization, either on or off premises.
                * Community - a cloud provisioned for use by multiple organizations, either on or off premises.
                * Public - a cloud provisioned for use by the general public and for any organization, on cloud provider premises.
                * Hybrid - a cloud model that is a combination of any of the last three.